MASTER OF COMPUTER SCIENCE/
MASTER OF SCIENCE IN COMPUTER SCIENCE

MCS 4204 –
Software Project Management
and Quality Assurance
Dr. Thushani Weerasinghe
Senior Lecturer, UCSC
UNIVERSITY OF COLOMBO SCHOOL OF COMPUTING

About The Course
• Credits – 03
• 04 Lecture Hours per week: 30 Hours (7-8 weeks)
• Practical (Activity) Hours: 15 Hours
• Evaluation – 40% Assignments, 60% Exam Paper
• Assignments =~ 5 (In-class tests and Take Home
Assignments)
• Exam Paper – 02 Hours
• 4 Compulsory Questions
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

References/Recommended Text
• A Guide to the Project Management Body
of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide)—Sixth
Edition, 2017 and Seventh Edition, 2021.
• Information Technology Project
Management, 8th Edition
• Software Quality Assurance: From Theory
to Implementation 1st Edition (ISBN-13:
978-1285847092, ISBN-10: 1285847091)
Chapter 1-4 and Chapter 10
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

PMBOK® Guide –
(https://www.pmi.org/pmb
ok-guidestandards/foundational/pm
bok)
https://www.oreilly.com/libr
ary/view/a-guideto/9781628256642/
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK)
• Is a widely accepted standard of project
management.
• Provides guidelines, rules and characteristics for
project management
• When it is consistently applied, it helps you, your
global peers and your organization to achieve
professional excellence.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Course Outline
1. Introduction to Software Project Management

2 hrs

2. Project Integration Management

2 hrs

3. Project Project Scope Management

2 hrs

4. Project Project Time Management

2 hrs

5. Project Cost Management

2 hrs

6. IT Project Quality Management

4 hrs

7. Project Communications Management

2 hrs

8. Project Human Resource Management

2 hrs

9. Project procurement Management

2 hrs

10. Project Risk management

2 hrs

11. Financial calculations for project appraisals

2 hrs

12. Software
quality
assurance
Master of Computer
Science/ Master
of Science in Computer Science

6 hrs

1. Introduction to Software Project
Management
After following this section, you should be able to;
• Define what s/w project management is
• Compare s/w projects and other types of projects
• Describe typical issues of s/w projects
• Define the usual stages of a software project and
management
• Identify the stakeholders and their roles
• Define the success criteria for a s/w project
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

What is a Project?
A project is a temporary endeavour undertaken
to create a unique product, service, or result.
A sequence of unique, complex, and connected
activities which
• has a goal or purpose and
• must be completed by a specific time,
• should be completed within budget, and
• according to specification.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Requirements

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Characteristics of a Project in an
organization
• Temporary – every project must have a
defined start and end in time
• Has a defined scope and resources

• Unique – not a routine activity, there should
be a goal, a specific set of operations to
achieve the goal
• Business Value Creation (net quantifiable benefit)– New
assets, brand recognition, drive change in the
organization
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Termination
• Terminates when the
• objectives have been achieved or
• because its objectives will not/ cannot be met,
or
• need for the project no longer exists.
• The decision to terminate a project requires
approval and authorization by an appropriate
authority.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Examples for Projects
• Writing a special report
• Setting up a sales kiosk for a professional accounting
meeting
• Developing a software
• Writing a new piano piece
• Designing a new product
The outcome of a project in an organization may result
in a standard product or a process for the organization
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Exercise 1
i)

Give three examples for projects and routine
activities and discuss how projects differ from routine
activities.

ii) Which of the following is a project?
A. Running a donut shop
B. Building another library in your area, which might
take a long time
C. Keeping a network up and running in a university
department
D. Running a warehouse
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Characteristics of a Software Project
• Non-routine tasks are involved
• Planning is required
• Specific objectives are to be met or a specific
product is to be created
• The project has a pre-determined time plan
• Work is often carried out for someone other
than yourself
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Characteristics of a S/W Project contd..
• Work involves several specialism
• People are formed into temporary groups to carry
out the task
• Work is carried out in several phases
• The resources that are available for use on the
project are constrained
• The project can be large or complex
More the factors apply  the more difficult the task will be.
More staff needs  requires more additional coordination
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Exercise 2
• What is the difference between software
projects and other types of projects?

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Software Projects Vs Other Projects
• Invisibility
• Physical artefacts such as bridges and roads are
visible unlike a software product

• Conformity
• Other projects interact with physical materials
that do not change rapidly while software projects
interact only with human clients. People can
change their attitudes and beliefs easily.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Software Projects Vs Other Projects
Contd.
• Complexity
• Software projects are more complex due to the
Complexity factors and characteristics they
possess

• Flexibility
• Software can be changed easily. Therefore, subject
to change according to the needs or changes of
other components

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Classification of S/W Projects
• Objective-based Vs Product-based
• Compulsory user-based Vs Voluntary user-based
• Information Systems Vs Embedded Systems

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Objective
based Vs Product based
• An on-line voting system for general public to select the most
popular sportsman of the year
• An on-line educational game for primary students

Exercise 3: Categorize the following projects into
two groups: Objective-based projects and Productbased projects

1. A payroll system for a business organization
2. An information and news website for a government ministry
3. A software system for a survey to determine the mobile
phone usage of selected government servants (in order to
consider for a communication allowance)

Compulsory User-based Vs Voluntary Userbased
• An on-line home delivery/take away food ordering
system
• A payroll system for a business organization
Exercise 4: Categorize the following projects into
Compulsory User-based projects and Voluntary Userbased projects
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

An information and news website for a government ministry
An on-line educational game for primary students
A CCTV camera-based surveillance system for a defense authority
An on-line registration system for internal students at a university
An on-line market survey system for a multi-national company

Information Systems Vs Embedded Systems
• Information systems –enable staff to carry out office
processes
• E.g. Stock control system
• Embedded systems- control machines
• E.g. A system to control air conditioning
equipment in a building
• Systems having elements of both
• E.g. A stock control system which can control an
automated warehouse
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

What is Project Management?
Refers to the application of knowledge, skills, tools and
techniques to achieve specific targets within specified budget
and time constraints.
1. Planning – what is to be done
2. Organizing – making arrangements
3. Directing – giving instructions
4. Monitoring – checking on progress
5. Controlling – taking actions to remedy hold-ups
6. Innovating – coming up with new solutions
7. Representing – liaising with users
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

A Set of PM Activities
• Identifying project requirements
• Addressing the various needs, concerns, and
expectations of stakeholders
• Establishing and maintaining active
communication with stakeholders
• Managing resources
• Balancing the competing project constraints

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Constraints
Agile Approach

• Major constraints: scope, cost, time, quality, resources
and risks

Project Management Framework

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Importance of Project Management

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Relationship Among Portfolios, Programs, and
Projects
• Portfolio: Projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and
operations managed in a coordinated manner to achieve
strategic objectives.
• Program: Related projects, subsidiary programs, and program
activities managed in a coordinated manner to obtain
benefits not available from managing them individually.
• A project may be managed in three separate scenarios:
• as a stand-alone project (outside a portfolio or program);
• within a program; or
• within a portfolio.

• Project management has interactions with portfolio and
program management when a project is within a portfolio or
program.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Relationship Among Portfolio, Programs, and
Projects

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Program/Project Mgt. vs Portfolio Mgt.
• Program and project management focus on doing programs and
projects the “right” way, and Portfolio management focuses on
doing the “right” programs or projects at the right time.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Relationship Among Portfolios, …contd.
• A portfolio refers to projects, programs, sub-portfolios,
and operations managed as a group to achieve strategic
objectives.
• Project may or may not be part of a program, but a
program will always have projects.
• Projects within a program are related through the
common outcome or collective capability.
• The projects or programs of the portfolio may not
necessarily be interdependent or directly related.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Management of Portfolios, Programs and
Projects
• Portfolio management aligns portfolios with
organizational strategies by selecting the right
programs or projects, prioritizing the work, and
providing the needed resources.
• Program management harmonizes its program
components and controls interdependencies in
order to realize specified benefits.
• Project management enables the achievement of
organizational goals and objectives
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Mgt Vs Portfolio Mgt

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Organizational Project Management

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Life Cycle

PM is accomplished
through the
application and
integration of these
five major
processes.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

A set of
chronological
phases

The core technical subject matter required for
effective project management
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

10 Knowledge Areas
1. Project Integration Management
2. Project Scope Management
3. Project Time Management
4. Project Cost Management
5. Project Quality Management
6. Project Human Resource Management
7. Project Communications Management
8. Project Risk Management
9. Project Procurement Management
10. Project Stakeholder Management
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Cost and Staffing Level Curve

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Phase
• A project phase is a collection of logically related
project activities that culminates in the completion
of one or more deliverables. The phases in a life cycle
can be described by a variety of attributes.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Phase Attributes
•
•
•
•
•

Name (e.g., Phase A, Phase 2, Proposal phase)
Number (e.g., three phases in the project)
Duration (e.g., 1 week, 1 month, 1 quarter)
Resource requirements (e.g., people, buildings, devices,…)
Entrance criteria for a project to move into a phase (e.g.,
specified approvals documented, specified documents
completed), and
• Exit criteria for a project to complete a phase (e.g.,
documented approvals, completed documents, completed
deliverables).

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Phase Gate
• Also known as phase review, stage gate, kill point, and
phase entrance or phase exit
• Held at the end of a phase
• Where performance and progress are compared to
project and business documents
• Decides to;
• Continue to the next phase,
• Continue to the next phase with modification,
• End the project,
• Remain in the phase, or
• Repeat the phase or elements of it.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Software Project Mgt Methods
1. Traditional/Waterfall method- best when scope, budget and
time factors are known
2. Incremental method (Kanban) - a method that focuses on
continuous improvement and helps you find the weak spots of
your workflow (Backlog> To do> Ongoing> Done)
3. Iterative method (Scrum) - a prescriptive framework employs
an iterative, incremental approach to optimize predictability
and control risk
4. Hybrid method (Scrumban) - a combination of both, that
actually put the Kanban practices on top of Scrum and makes
it easy for Scrum teams to focus on continuous improvement
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Scrum or Kanban, Which is the best?

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

What is Scrumban?

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Exercise 5: Select the correct option
What is the difference between Waterfall method
and Agile method in S/W project management?
A. Waterfall is preplanned and so are Agile projects.
B. Scope is fixed on Agile projects but not on
Waterfall projects.
C. Agile plans are just in time, and Waterfall projects
are preplanned.
D. They both are project management frameworks.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Management Structure for Projects in a
large organization
Senior Mgt. group with
responsibility for system
development and operation
(department heads from
end-user and IT/IS groups)

IS manages and end-user
managers responsible for
several projects
System analysts, SEs and
other specialists
responsible for individual
projects
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Roles in Project Management

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Stakeholders
• Internal to the project team
• Be under the direct control of the project leader

• External to the project
team but within the same
organization
• Users of the system who can
do system testing

• External to the project
team and the organization
• Users of the system –
customers or contractors

Contract Management and Technical Project
Management
• Project Manager in Client Organization
• Contract Supervision

• Project Manager in Software Supplier Org.
• Technical Management

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Plans, Methods and Methodologies
• Method- Relates to a type of activity
• Plan – Takes the method
• Methodology- Group of methods or
techniques
• Planning involves;
• Selecting a suitable method
• Convert methods to real activities
• Define the start and end date of each activity
• Define who will carry it out
• Identify what tools and materials will be used
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Exercise:
i. Define what project management is.
ii. Identify the roles in Project
management
iii. Describe the major Activities of a
project
iv. Describe the Project Life Cycle
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

Project Manager
1. Describe the role of a project manager.
2. Identify the essential skills of a project manager.
3. Is communication skill required? Explain your answer.

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

23 August 2025

62

The Role of a
Project Manager

Project Manager’s
Sphere of
Influence

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

23 August 2025

63

Role of a PM
• Leads the project team to meet the project’s objectives
and stakeholders’ expectations
• Works to balance the competing constraints on the
project with the resources available
• Performs communication roles between the project
sponsor, team members, and other stakeholders
• Providing direction and presenting the vision of
success for the project
• Using soft skills to balance the conflicting and
competing goals of the project stakeholders in order
to achieve consensus.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

23 August 2025

64

PM’s Communication Skill requirement
• Demonstrate sufficient verbal, nonverbal and writing skills;
• Create maintain, and adhere to communications plans and
schedules;
• Communicate predictably and consistently;
• Seek to understand the project stakeholders’
communication needs;
• Make communications concise, clear, complete, simple,
relevant, and tailored;
• Include important positive and negative news;
• Incorporate feedback channels;
• Develop formal and informal networks of relationships
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

23 August 2025

65

Skills Needed by a Project Manager
•

•

•

Technical project management. The
knowledge, skills, and behaviours related
to specific domains of project, program,
and portfolio management. The
technical aspects of performing one’s
role.
Leadership. The knowledge, skills, and
behaviours needed to guide, motivate,
and direct a team, to help an
organization achieve its business goals.
Strategic and business management.
The knowledge of and expertise in the
industry and organization to enhance
performance and better delivers
business outcomes.
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

23 August 2025

66

Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

23 August 2025
|
67
https://www.nextgeneration.ie

Principles of PM
• Be diligent, respectful, and
caring steward
• Focus on value
• Build quality into processes
and deliverables
• Create a collaborative team
environment
• Demonstrate leadership
behaviours
• Navigate complexity
• Optimize risk responses
Master of Computer Science/ Master of Science in Computer Science

• Effectively engage with
stakeholders
• Tailor based on context
• Embrace adaptability and
resiliency
• Recognize, evaluate, and
respond to system
interactions
• Enable change to achieve the
envisioned future state

